# ![Ktistec](public/logo.png)
  - [Features](#features)
    - [Text and images](#text-and-images)
    - [Draft posts](#draft-posts)
    - [Threaded replies](#threaded-replies)
    - [@-mention and #-hashtag autocomplete](#-mention-and--hashtag-autocomplete)
    - [Control over comment visibility](#control-over-comment-visibility)
    - [Pretty URLs](#pretty-urls)
    - [Followers/following](#followersfollowing)
    - [Content discovery](#content-discovery)
    - [Content filtering](#content-filtering)
    - [Blocking](#blocking)
    - [Metrics](#metrics)
  - [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
  - [Installation](#installation)
    - [Running Tests](#running-tests)
  - [Usage](#usage)
  - [Contributors](#contributors)
  - [Copyright and License](#copyright-and-license)

**Ktistec** is an ActivityPub (https://www.w3.org/TR/activitypub/) server.
It is intended for individual users, not farms of users, although
support for additional users will be added in the future. It is
designed to have few runtime dependencies -- for example, it uses
SQLite as its database, instead of PostgreSQL + Redis + etc. It is
licensed under the AGPLv3.

Ktistec powers [Epiktistes](https://epiktistes.com/), my low-volume
home in the Fediverse. If you want to talk to me, I'm
[@toddsundsted@epiktistes.com](https://epiktistes.com/@toddsundsted).

## Features

### Text and images

Ktistec is intended for writing and currently supports the minimum
viable set of tools for that purpose.

Text formatting options include *bold*, *italic*, *strikethrough*,
*code* (inline and block), *superscript*/*subscript*, *headers*,
*blockquotes* with nested indentation, and both *bullet* and *numeric*
lists.

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/toddsundsted/ktistec/main/images/tszn70.png" width=460>

Ktistec supports inline placement of images, with ActivityPub image
attachments used for compatibility with non-Ktistec servers.

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/toddsundsted/ktistec/main/images/aecz36.png" width=460>

### Drafts posts

Meaningful writing is an iterative process so Ktistec supports draft
posts. Draft posts aren't visible in your timeline until you publish
them.

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/toddsundsted/ktistec/main/images/683hld.png" width=460>

### Threaded replies

Threaded replies make it easier to follow discussions with lots of
posts.

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/toddsundsted/ktistec/main/images/eaxx1q.png" width=460>

In a distributed, federated system, it's not uncommon for threads to
be incomplete. Someone you follow shares a reply to a postâ€”you see the
shared reply but not the original post. Threads with incomplete
history are now noted as such, and you can fetch the missing posts
from the top of the thread.

### @-mention and #-hashtag autocomplete

Ktistec automatically converts @-mentions and #-hashtags into links,
and to encourage hands-on-the-keyboard composition, Ktistec supports
autocompletion.

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/toddsundsted/ktistec/main/images/22aee8.gif" width=460>

### Control over comment visibility

Ktistec promotes healthy dialog. Ktistec allows you to control which
replies to your posts are public, and visible to anonymous users, and
which are private.

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/toddsundsted/ktistec/main/images/b70e69.png" width=460>

### Pretty URLs

Assign pretty (canonical) URLs to posts, both for SEO and as helpful
mnemonics for users (and yourself).

### Followers/following

The Fediverse is a distributed social network. You can follow other
users on other servers from your timeline or by searching for them by
name. Ktistec is also compatible with the "remote follow" protocol
used by Mastodon and others.

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/toddsundsted/ktistec/main/images/88hvqq.png" width=460>

### Content discovery

In addition to following other users, you can follow threads, hashtags
and even mentions. When posts arrive for content you follow, a
notification is added to your notifications. To make navigation and
discovery easier, post details pages now have labels with links to
internal hashtag and mention index pages.

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/toddsundsted/ktistec/main/images/d8kf0q.png" width=460>

### Content filtering

Content filters prevent undesirable content from appearing in your
timeline and notifications. Filter terms match on the text of a post
(ignoring any markup). Wildcards are supported.

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/toddsundsted/ktistec/main/images/wzgeti.png" width=460>

### Blocking

Ktistec gives you control over what you see. Blocking authors and
posts removes them and their content from your timeline.

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/toddsundsted/ktistec/main/images/42fwx6.png" width=460>

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/toddsundsted/ktistec/main/images/epdb39.png" width=460>

### Metrics

Ktistec tracks metrics about how the instance is performing. Right
now, the only metric is inbox and outbox volume per account, but the
machinery is in place to do much more.

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/toddsundsted/ktistec/main/images/vrxnmg.png" width=460>

## Prerequisites

To run an instance of Ktistec as part of the Fediverse, you'll need a
server with a fixed hostname. In the Fediverse, users are identified
by (and content is addressed to) a hostname and a username.

## Installation

You must compile the Ktistec server executable from its source code.
You will need to install a recent release of the [Crystal programming
language](https://crystal-lang.org/install/). Ktistec also requires
SQLite3 version 3.35.0 or later.

To obtain the source code, clone the [Ktistec Github
repo](https://github.com/toddsundsted/ktistec).

If you intend to do *development* on the server, check out the
**main** branch. In addition to Crystal, you'll also need Node.js and
Webpack to build the JS and CSS assets from source.

If you just want to build and run the server, check out the **dist**
branch.

To compile the server:

`$ crystal build src/ktistec/server.cr`

If you're developing on the **main** branch, build the assets next
(skip this step if you're on the **dist** branch--the latest JS and
CSS assets are already built for you):

`$ npm run build`

Run the compiled executable:

`$ LOG_LEVEL=INFO ./server`

The first time the server runs it will run the database migrations
necessary to create the database. This should only take a few seconds,
maximum. When the server is ready to accept connections you will see
something like:

`Ktistec is ready to lead at http://0.0.0.0:3000`

You can now connect to and configure the server.

### Running Tests

If you change the code, you should run the tests:

`$ crystal spec`

## Usage

The server runs on port 3000. If you're planning on running it in
production, you should put Nginx or Apache in front of it. Don't
forget your SSL certificate!

When you run Ktistec for the first time, you'll need to name the
server and create the primary user.

Ktistec needs to know the *host name* of its home on the internet.
The server host name is a part of every users's identity in the
Fediverse. My identity is "toddsundsted@epiktistes.com". The host name
is "epiktistes.com" and other federated servers, and users, know to
send posts and other content to me there.

Give the server a *site name*, too.

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/toddsundsted/ktistec/main/images/kl3yf6.png" width=640>

After you name the server, you create the primary user. Ktistec
currently supports only one user. This is intentional -- one of
Ktistec's design goals is to promote a more fully distributed
Fediverse.

At a minimum, you need to specify the user's *username*, *password*
and *timezone*. You can use a single character for the username if you
want, but you'll need six characters, including letters, numbers and
symbols, for the password. *timezone* is any valid IANA time zone
database string (e.g. "America/New_York").

*Display name* and *summary* are optional.

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/toddsundsted/ktistec/main/images/mq4ntx.png" width=640>

Once these steps are done, you're running!

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/toddsundsted/ktistec/main/images/o0ton2.png" width=640>

## Contributors

- [Todd Sundsted](https://github.com/toddsundsted) - creator and maintainer

## Copyright and License

Ktistec ActivityPub Server
Copyright (C) 2021, 2022, 2023 Todd Sundsted

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU Affero General Public License as
published by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the
License, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU
Affero General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU Affero General Public
License along with this program. If not, see
(https://www.gnu.org/licenses/).
